## Introduction {#intro}

Machine learning is a branch of computational science organized around the learning by computers via algorithms of relationships between dataset variables. Traditionally this has referred to statistical methods such as linear and logistic regression, but as the scale and complexity of data have increased, many new ML methods have been developed to model and learn increasingly complex relationships.
One powerful approach for learning complex (that is, both linear and non-linear) relationships between input and output variables is called an artificial neural network.
These networks are modeled after the human brain, and they comprise artificial neurons arranged into layers.
Each layer receive input from previous layers (the first of which represents the input data), and then "fires off" its own weighted output that then serves as input into subsequent layers in the network. 
Thus, the process of "training" a neural network is in fact the tuning of these output weights such that a metric called a cost function is optimized.
Deep learning utilizes artificial neural networks with many layers (hence the term "deep"), and given the computational advances of recent decades, is now capable of being applied to massive data sets and in enumerable contexts.
In many circumstances, deep learning has the capacity to learn more complex relationships and make more accurate predictions than other methods.
Therefore, deep learning has become its own subfield of machine learning, and in the context of biological research, has been increasingly used to derive novel insights from high-dimensional biological data [@doi:10.1098/rsif.2017.0387].
For example, deep learning has been used to predict protein-drug binding kinetics [@doi:10.1038/s41467-017-02388-1], to identify the lab-of-origin of synthetic DNA [@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-05378-z], and to uncover the facial phenotypes of genetic disorders [@doi:10.1038/s41591-018-0279-0].

However, for researchers and students new to machine learning, and even for those experienced in using classical machine learning methods (for example, linear regression), using deep learning correctly can be daunting due to the highly complex nature of the method and the corresponding toolkits.
General resources communicating best practices to the scientific community broadly and the biological community specifically are scarce, and any resources that do exist are prone to reaching obsolescence rapidly due to deep learning's active and specialized nature.
In addition, the lack of established standards or concise recommendations for the application of deep learning to biological questions further limits newcomers from using state-of-the-art deep learning in their research.  

To address this issue, we solicited input from a community of researchers with varied biological and deep learning interests.
These individuals collaboratively contributed to the writing of this manuscript using the GitHub version control platform [@url:https://github.com/Benjamin-Lee/deep-rules] and the Manubot manuscript generation toolset [@url:https://greenelab.github.io/meta-review/]. The goal was to generate a practical, accessible, and concise set of guidelines and suggestions for biologically oriented researchers to follow when using deep learning.

In the course of our discussions, several themes became clear: the importance of understanding and applying machine learning fundamentals [@doi:10.1186/s13040-017-0155-3] as a baseline for utilizing deep learning, the necessity for extensive model comparisons with careful evaluation, and the need for critical thought in interpreting results generated by deep learning, among others.
Ultimately, the tips we collate range from high-level guidance to best practices for implementation, and it is our hope that they will provide actionable, deep learning-specific instruction for both new and experienced deep learning practitioners.
By making deep learning more accessible for use in biological research, we aim to improve the overall usage and reporting quality of deep learning in the literature, and to enable increasing numbers of researchers to utilize these state-of-the art techniques effectively and accurately.