## Tip 3: Understand the complexities of training deep neural networks {#complexities}

Correctly training deep neural networks is non-trivial.
There are many different options and potential pitfalls at every stage.
To get good results, one must often train networks across a wide range of different hyperparameter settings.
Such training can be made more difficult by the demanding nature of these deep networks, which often require extensive time investments into tuning and computing infrastructure to achieve state-of-the-art performance [@doi:10.1109/JPROC.2017.2761740].
Furthermore, this experimentation is often noisy, which necessitates increased repetition and exacerbates the challenges inherent to deep learning.
On the whole, all code, random seeds, parameters, and results must be carefully corralled using general coding standards and best practices (for example, version control [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004947] and continuous integration [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3780]) to be reproducible and interpretable [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003285; @arxiv:1810.08055].
For application-based research, this organization is also fundamental to the efficient sharing of research work and the ability to keep models up to date as new data becomes available.

A specific reproducibility pitfall that is often missed in applying deep learning is the use (often by default) of non-deterministic algorithms.
For example, GPU acceleration libraries like CUDA/CuDNN, which facilitate the parallelized computing powering state-of-the-art deep learning, often use algorithms by default that produce different outcomes from iteration to iteration even with the same hardware and software.
Therefore, achieving reproducibility in this context requires explicitly specifying the use of deterministic algorithms (which are typically available within deep learning libraries).
This step is distinct from and in addition to the setting of random seeds that typically achieve reproducibility by controlling pseudorandom deterministic procedures such as shuffling and initialization [@url:https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/sdk/cudnn-developer-guide/index.html#reproducibility].

Similar to the suggestions above about starting with simpler models, starting with relatively small networks and then increasing the size and complexity as needed can help prevent practitioners from wasting significant time and resources on running highly complex models that feature numerous unresolved problems.
Again, practitioners must beware of the choices made implicitly (that is, by default settings) by deep learning libraries.
These seemingly trivial details, such as the selection of optimization algorithm, can have significant effects on model performance.
For example, adaptive methods often lead to faster convergence during training but may lead to worse generalization performance on independent datasets [@url:https://papers.nips.cc/paper/7003-the-marginal-value-of-adaptive-gradient-methods-in-machine-learning].
These nuanced elements are easy to overlook, but it is critical to consider them carefully and to evaluate their potential impact.

In short, researchers should use smaller and simpler networks to enable faster prototyping, follow general software development best practices to maximize reproducibility, and check software documentation to understand default choices.
