## Tip 3: Maximize reproducibility when training deep neural networks {#reproducibility}

Ensuring reproducibility when using deep learning requires effort at every stage of the research process.
When using published data, information such as the resource used, the date downloaded, and the version of the dataset, if any, are critical to record.
Otherwise, when relying upon new data, this data must be shared if ethically or legally permitted.
Similarly, all data collection, processing, training, and evaluation software must be made public under an open-source license, regardless of whether the data can be shared [@doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2766-y].
This code should follow established best practices for reproducibility [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003285], including robustness [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005412] and documentation [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006561].
These steps are critical both for reproducing the original findings as well as modifying the model or training it on new data.

The experimentation inherent to deep learning model optimization is often requires repetition and represents an additional challenge.
At a minimum, all random seeds, training parameters (for example, batch size and gradient descent algorithm), and execution results must be carefully tracked and reported.
Non-determinism is also a possibility when the underlying software, dependencies, and hyperparameters are identical but the output is not.
When using GPUs, the default use of non-deterministic algorithms by the popular CUDA and CuDNN libraries requires explicitly specifying the use of (possibly slower) deterministic algorithms in the training code [@url:https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/sdk/cudnn-developer-guide/index.html#reproducibility].
However, these results are only guaranteed to be deterministic for the same hardware and software, so information about the versions used must be documented.

In short, practitioners must follow both general software development best practices and those tailored to deep learning maximize reproducibility.
